#summary When contributing to Oryx, your code should be well-documented. This document provides some best practices and tools to comment your code.
#labels Phase-Implementation,Phase-QA

= JavaScript =
For documenting JavaScript, [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/ JsDoc Toolkit] is used in Oryx to generate documentation directly from code (like in JavaDoc). [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/wiki/FAQ#How_this_project_is_related_to_JSDoc Why aren't we using JSDoc?]

== Write Documentation ==
 * [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/wiki/TagReference Tag Reference]
 * [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/wiki/InlineDocs Inline Documentation (for nicer documentation, advanced)]

Small example:
{{{
/**
    @param {String} name
    @type Array
*/
function getPerson(name) {
}
}}}

JavaScript as a dynamic programming language based on prototypes makes documenting classes and methods more difficult than commenting Java code. Here are some best practices.

=== Documenting namespaces ===
(This must be done if the jsdoc tool throws errors when it doesn't find a namespace)

{{{
/**
   @namespace Oryx name space for plugins
   @name ORYX.Plugins
*/
if(!Oryx.Plugins)
  Oryx.Plugins = {}
// Alternative
Ext.namespace("ORYX.Plugins");
}}}

=== Documenting classes and functions constructed with Clazz.extend ===
If contructing a class, JSDoc cannot know if functions are instance or static methods. With the help of the tag `@methodOf ORYX.Plugins.MyPlugin.prototype` a function can directly reference if it belongs to the class or to an instance/ a prototype. So that you do not have to specify this for each method within one Clazz.extend call, use the [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/wiki/TagLends @lends] tag (must be defined _directly_ before the object) as in the following example:

{{{
/**
 * This is my wonderful class..
 * @class ORYX.Plugins.MyPlugin
 * @extends Clazz
 * @param {Object} myParam This is a param referring to the construct of the class.
*/
ORYX.Plugins.MyPlugin= Clazz.extend(
    /** @lends ORYX.Editor.prototype */
{
    construct: function(myParam){
      // Do sth.
    }

    /**
     * This is a function description
     */
    myFunction: function(){
        //do sth.
    }

   /**
    *  This is a private method
    *  @private
    */
   myPrivateFunction: function(){
       //do sth. private
   }
});
}}}

== Generate Documentation - Tool Support ==
 * [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/downloads/list Tool Download]
 * [http://code.google.com/p/jsdoc-toolkit/wiki/CommandlineOptions Tool Command Line Options]

{{{
java -jar <JsDocDir>\jsrun.jar <JsDocDir>\app\run.js "<PathToSourceFile(s)>" -t=<JsDocDir>\templates\jsdoc -d="<OutputPath>"
}}}

_TODO: Writing ant tasks, generate jsdoc from whole javascript and publish it, intgration into cruise control, ..._