#summary Internationalization of Oryx
#labels Phase-Implementation

= Introduction =

To support multiple languages in Oryx, we will implement internationalization features step by step and add additional languages. Once all features are implemented, we also hope that external contributors will help us adding more languages. The first version does not support manual selection of the language, but is dependant on the browser's language.

You can seperate I18N into two packages within Oryx:
 * Translation of stencil set definitions (first version implemented in revision 893)
 * Translation of the user interface

In the following sections I will explain how I18N in these two areas works and how you can add additional languages.

The default language for Oryx is American English that has the ISO definition *en-us*.


= I18N of Stencil Set Definitions =

Translated texts are directly added to the stencil set definition file. If you are not familiar with the definition of stencil sets, you can have a look [http://code.google.com/p/oryx-editor/wiki/HowToCreateStencilSet here]. The following attributes can be translated:
 * For the stencil set:
   * title
   * description
 * For each stencil:
   * title
   * description
   * groups
 * For each property:
   * title
   * description
 * For each property item of complex properties:
   * name

When defining translations you have to add additional json attributes as siblings of the attribute you define the translations according to a simple naming convention:
{{{
attribute_xx_yy
}}}
_xx_ specifies an ISO language code, _yy_ defines an ISO country code. The ISO country code is optional. Here is an example of the EPC stencil set:
{{{
...
{
  "type": "node",
  "id":"Event",
  "title":"Event",
  "title_de": "Ereignis",
  "groups":[ "EPC" ],
  "groups_de":[ "EPK" ],
  "description":"An Event",
  "description_de":"Ereignis",
  "view":"node.event.svg",
  "icon":"new_event.png",
  "roles": [
    "event",
    "all"
  ],
  "properties": [
    ...
  ]
},
...
}}}
The attribute *title* defines the text in default language, whereas *title_de* provides a German translation. In this way any number of translations can be defined.

The decision which translation is used works as follows (for each attribute each time it is accessed): I assume that the language is *es-es* for Spanish. First, it is checked, if *attributename_es_es* exists. If so, the value is returned. Otherwise, it is checked, if *attributename_es* exists and if yes, the value is returned. Otherwise, the default value is returned (that is the value of *attributename*). So, if a translation of a stencil set is incomplete, the default values of those attributes are returned that are not translated.



= I18N of the User Interface =

_coming soon..._